---
title: 'Story Squad: A children's app that gamifies reading/writing in the age of remote learning'
date: '2021-01-07'
---

<h5>In my last weeks of Lambda we were given the opportunity to contribute to an actual startup company's product, which I will refer to as **"stake holders"**. The project consisted of a large codebase maintained by fellow Lambda students as well as the stake holder's in house devs. I was placed on a team with four other developers, half of which specialized in full stack web dev and the other half data science.</h5>

We were to report to our stake holders during our 3 week collaboration period on Story Squad. A normal day consisted of a 20-30 minute standup meeting, discussing our objectives for the day and what we had accomplished yesterday. In working on Story Squad, I was able to improve the game considerably with my team, by means of:

- <b>Making the userflow experience more intuitive</b>
- <b>Implementing an emoji feedback component</b>
- <b>Adding new backend tables for stories/chapters enabling progress tracking.</b>

To build out these features we were given a lot of freedom to decide how we'd like to work. My team and I decided to squad-program for most of our time in Labs, which gave me the opportunity to work closely with developers from different backgrounds and with different skillsets and ask/answer many questions. I learned a lot by listening as well as leading my teammates, pushing myself to exercise great care in how I communicated my ideas, as well as being reciprocative of theirs, providing my feedback to my team as well as the stake holders as constructively and honestly as possible. Additionally, being able to work with a group of engineers with whom I could learn from/educate was a huge help for me. I love learning new things and talking to people, so being on a team with those who have different skill sets than me was great -- I was able to ask how their code worked and vice versa; when I was asked how I would implement an idea or program a component, I took great pleasure in helping them understand, because explaining how something works to someone else has always helped me develop a deeper understanding of the subject in question myself. On the topic of helping others learn, Story Squad gamifies learning for children and in the age of remote learning/working, I really felt like I was making something useful, also, it doesn't hurt that I love gamification. I felt it was a particularly relevant project to work on given the current times and the growing need for children who find themselves in a completely new learning environment, to have something extra that may help to hold their attention, making the experience more interactive and fun.

To implement our features and ship as fast as possible while delivering meaningful changes of simple, thoughtful code, we started out by just trying the app for ourselves and seeing where it fell short. From the very beginning it was obvious what was wrong with the app -- it was confusing which components should be clicked on for a player to complete all of their goals within the game. Upon completing challenges, a player was left with a screen full of buttons with no indication as to where they should go next. To solve this and make the user experience simpler and more interactive/intuitive, especially considering the app was for younger children, I suggested we give visual cues to direct the players where to click on the screen. These visual cues had logic that checked to see if the challenges were met and if they were, the next logical screen for them to navigate to would pop out at them. I felt as though these simple changes carried a lot of value and made the overall user experience much better.

For emoji feedback the team and I thought for a little bit about how it should work and what it should look like. To stay consistent with our other quality of life improvements, we settled on the fact that one should be able to select and deselect emojis, the screen should be big and obvious that it's to be interacted with, and it should look fun and inviting for children of all ages. My teammate Nestor had a great idea to implement a React hook that would save us a lot of time in coding out the emojis. We had the emojis on the screen in no time and quickly wrote state logic that checked if an object was clicked/submitted or not. Once the functionality was there the next step was to make the emoji feedback menu sleek in design and feel good to use, and I believe we accomplished that in the short time we had.

For our backend portion I had a great time helping to implement some tables and helping to figure out what should be the primary key and which table should reference what. We settled on having a stories table which had a primary key referenced by the chapter table. This linked the story to the chapter and let us track progress of the player and where they were in their given story. One small issue we faced was that when we pushed our backend changes we kept getting 'prettier' errors which is a compiler that formats your code into a more readable, and for lack of a better word, prettier version. The issue was that when we pushed our code up to GitHub, prettier had an issue with the syntax because some of the students on my team were not using the Prettier compiler. I helped my teammate Keean install Prettier and gain a better understanding of how VS Code extensions work, changing his IDE's default code formatter to prettier using ES6 syntax. We knocked out the backend changes in no time which gave us ample time to write up some documentation and finalize minor front end changes.

Overall, Labs was a great experience. I really enjoyed being able to share my ideas with a team and seeing how receptive everyone was to what I was suggesting. I utlized my communication skills, leadership skills, and listening skills to guide my team into its most productive state, suggesting meaningful changes that would let us ship the fastest while maintaining high quality. In working on a team with other students I was able to ask a lot of questions and learn a lot from my peers. It was super interesting and fulfilling to be able to work side by side with other developers on a common goal of creating something awesome, all the while learning new things and strengthening some of my existing skills. I'm really excited to do this again in a work environment. 

<a href="https://github.com/Lambda-School-Labs/dep-story-squad-fe-c">Story Squad FE</a>
<a href="https://github.com/Lambda-School-Labs/dep-story-squad-be-c">Story Squad BE</a>